Python support documentation (#2209)
openvinotoolkit/model_server: docs/python_support/python_support.md

# Python support in OpenVINO Model Server - preview {#ovms_docs_python_support_python_support}

5. PythonExecutorCalculator And Mediapipe Graphs
6. Usage With gRPC Streaming
> timestamping and output gathering
> single request multiple response (cycles)

## Introduction

**This feature is in preview, meaning some behviors of the feature as well as user interface are subjects to change in the future versions**

 Starting with version 2023.3, model server introduced support for execution of custom Python code. Users can now create their own servables in Python. Those servables can run simple pre or post processing tasks as well as complex ones like image or text generation. 
 

>  Python is enabled via [Mediapipe](../mediapipe.md) by built-in `PythonExecutorCalculator` that allows creating graph nodes that execute Python code. That way Python servables can be used as standalone endpoints (single node graphs) or be part of larger Mediapipe solutions.

Reviewer: Minor: mediapipe is refered everywhere with 2 capital letters - MediaPipe, maybe we should do it as well?
https://developers.google.com/mediapipe

 Checkout [quickstart guide](quickstart.md) for simple usage example.

*Note:* This feature is currently in preview.

 ## Building Docker Image

> Publically distributed Docker images support Python, but they do not come with any external modules. If bare Python is all you need then you can use public image directly. Otherwise you need to extend public image with additional layers that will install all the stuff you need for your Python code to work. For example, let's say you need numpy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Publicly distributed Docker images support Python, but they do not come with any external modules. If bare Python is all you need then you can use public image directly. Otherwise you need to extend public image with additional layers that will install all the stuff you need for your Python code to work. For example, let's say you need numpy.
```

In that case your Dockerfile may look like:

```dockerfile
FROM openvino/model_server:latest
USER root
ENV LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/ovms/lib
ENV PYTHONPATH=/ovms/lib/python
RUN apt update && apt install -y python3-pip git
RUN pip3 install numpy
ENTRYPOINT [ `/ovms/bin/ovms` ]
```

TODO: Here we could provide make target with requirements location as a parameter.

### Building Model Server From Source
In above section you use public Docker image. In case you want to build it from source do the following:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/model_server.git
cd model_server
make docker_build MEDIAPIPE_DISABLE=0 PYTHON_DISABLE=0 OV_USE_BINARY=1 RUN_TESTS=0
cd ..
```
Resulting Docker image can be extended with additional layers just as the public one.

## Python Servable

When deploying Python servable, Model Server expects Python file with an `OvmsPythonModel` class implemented:

```python
class OvmsPythonModel:

    def initialize(self, kwargs):
        """

>         `initialize` is called when model server loads graph definition. It allows to initialize and maintain state between subsequent execute() calls and even graph instances. 

Reviewer: When rendered on github, it does not wrap around, means you need to find the bottom of the script and scroll left and right (not sure about sphinx)

        For gRPC unary, graphs are recreated per request. 
        For gRPC streaming, there can be multiple graph instances existing at the same time. 
        OvmsPythonModel object is initialized with this method and then shared between all graph instances. Implementing this function is required (should it be?).

        Parameters:
        -----------
        kwargs : dict
            Available arguments:
            * node_name: string
                Name of the node in the graph
            * input_streams: list of strings

>                 List of input stream names defined for the node in graph configuration

Reviewer: I think this is wrong to say "input stream names", maybe we should explain the A:B format user received? rhs/lhs

Reviewer 2: ideally show part of pbtxt file here and what python script will receive

Author: Let's do that in the descriptions section below. I don't want to make this Python code sample too big.

            * output_streams: list of strings
                List of output stream names defined for the node in graph configuration
        -----------
        """
        print("Running initialize...")

    def execute(self, inputs):
        """
        `execute` is called in `Process` method of PythonExecutorCalculator which in turn is called by Mediapipe framework. How Mediapipe calls `Process` method for the node depends on the configuration and the two configurations supported by PythonExecutorCalculator are:
        
        * Regular: `execute` runs every time the node receives inputs. Produces one set of outputs per one set of inputs. For unary endpoints it's the only possible configuration.

>         * Generative: `execute` runs multiple times for single inputs set. Produces multiple sets of outputs over time per single set of inputs. Works only with streaming endpoints. 

Reviewer: Give hint that it is done by yielding instead of return? Is it really true that "execute" runs "multiple times"? In practice, it only runs once, but continues, right?

Reviewer 2: Generative executes N times when N is number of input streams?
We could steer this behavior with different input_streams handler correct? If so maybe it's worth to mention here or direct to documentation about this?

Author: @dkalinowski There are more details below in the section with description, outside of this sample

@atobiszei  No, generative runs N times per just one complete set of inputs. In description section below there are links to `Execution modes` section that describes it further. About handler - calculator works with sync set input handler for generative mode. If user changes that, we don't guarantee it will work as expected.

        Implemeting this function is required.

        Parameters:
        -----------
        * inputs: list of pyovms.Tensor
        -----------
        
        Returns: list of pyovms.Tensor or generator
        """
        ...
        return outputs

    def finalize(self):
        """
        `finalize` is called when model server unloads graph definition. It allows to perform any cleanup actions before the graph is removed. Implementing this function is optional.
        """
        print("Running finalize...")
```

### initialize

`initialize` is called when model server loads graph definition. It allows to initialize and maintain state between subsequent `execute` calls and even graph instances.

> For gRPC unary, graphs are recreated per request.

Reviewer: Isnt it duplicated of the snippet above?

Author: Yes, it's supposed to have more details and better visual.

#### Error handling

Signaling that something went wrong should be done by throwing an exception.
The exception is caught by the `PythonExecutorCalculator` which logs it and returns non-OK status.
Model Server then reads that status and sets graph in an error state. Then it closes all graph's input streams and waits until in-progress actions are finished. Once it's done the graph gets removed.

This behavior has different effect on the client depending on the kind of gRPC endpoint used - unary or streaming.

**Unary** 

With unary endpoint a graph is created, executed and destroyed for every request. If `execute` encounters an error, model server logs it and sends error message in response immediately. 

**Streaming**

With streaming endpoint a graph is created for the first request in the stream and then reused by all subsequent requests. 

If `execute` encounters an error on the first request (for example the Python code doesn't work as expected), model server logs it  and sends error message in response immediately. The graph gets destroyed.

> If `execute` encounters an error on one of the subsequent requests (for example wrong data has been received), model server logs it and Mediapipe sets error in the graph, but the client won't receive error message until it sends another request. When the next request is read from the stream, model server checks if graph has an error, destroys it and sends response to the client.

Reviewer: Add info that this is known issue?

> As of now, the graphs are not recoverable so if an error occurs, you need to create a new stream.

Reviewer: It depends, if the error is so that client sends too many inputs - those are ignored and graph is continued (am I right?)

Author: Correct, I'll describe conditions when graph is destroyed and stream gets closed vs those when it keeps running

**Implementing this function is required.**

### finalize

`finalize` is called when model server unloads graph definition. It allows to perform any cleanup actions before the graph is removed. 

#### Parameters and return value

`finalize` does not have any parameters and is not expected to return any value.

> #### Error handling

Reviewer: Subjective, but I found it misleading why so many error handling paragraphs are here. It might be helpful to distinguish those init/exec/final paragraphs even more

## Introduction

**This feature is in preview, meaning some behviors of the feature as well as user interface are subjects to change in the future versions**

 Starting with version 2023.3, model server supports execution of custom Python code. Users can now create their own servables in Python. Those servables can run simple pre or post processing tasks as well as complex ones like image or text generation. 
 
 Python execution is enabled via [Mediapipe](../mediapipe.md) by built-in `PythonExecutorCalculator` that allows creating graph nodes that execute Python code. That way Python servables can be used as standalone endpoints (single node graphs) or be part of larger Mediapipe solutions.

 Checkout [quickstart guide](quickstart.md) for simple usage example.

*Note:* This feature is currently in preview.

 ## Building Docker Image

Publically distributed Docker images support Python, but they do not come with any external modules. If bare Python is all you need then you can use public image directly. Otherwise you need to extend public image with additional layers that will install all the stuff you need for your Python code to work. For example, let's say you need numpy.

> In that case your Dockerfile may look like:

Reviewer 3: I think we should point users to a Dockerfile importing a requirements.txt file. Users should just change the list of requirements and build the image - use the target `make python_image`

```dockerfile
FROM openvino/model_server:latest
USER root
ENV LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/ovms/lib
ENV PYTHONPATH=/ovms/lib/python
RUN apt update && apt install -y python3-pip git
RUN pip3 install numpy
ENTRYPOINT [ `/ovms/bin/ovms` ]
```

TODO: Here we could provide make target with requirements location as a parameter.

> ### Building Model Server From Source

Reviewer 3: This should be in a page building_from_source.md

For gRPC unary, graphs are recreated per request.

For gRPC streaming, there can be multiple graph instances existing at the same time.

`OvmsPythonModel` object is initialized with this method and then shared between all graph instances.

#### Parameters and return value

`initialize` is called with `kwargs` parameter which is a dictionary. All keys are strings. Available keys and values:

| Key           | Value type | Description |
| ------------- |:-----------| :-----------| 
| node_name     | string | Name of the node in the graph |
| input_names   | list of strings | List of input stream names defined for the node in graph configuration | 
| outputs_names | list of strings | List of output stream names defined for the node in graph configuration |

`initialize` is not expected to return any value.

#### Error handling

Signaling that something went wrong should be done by throwing an exception.
When model server catches exception from `initialize` it cleans up all Python resources in the graph (including those belonging to the correctly loaded nodes) and sets the whole graph in invalid state.

> 

Reviewer 3: I noticed that exception from execute is not printed in logs

Reviewer 2: I noticed the same when  there was  error with importing numpy

> # Python servables in OpenVINO Model Server {#ovms_docs_python_support_python_support}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Python Servables in OpenVINO Model Server {#ovms_docs_python_support_python_support}
```

## Introduction

> **This feature is in preview, meaning some behviors of the feature as well as user interface are subjects to change in the future versions**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**This feature is currently in preview, meaning some behaviors of the feature and user interface may change in future versions**
```

>  Starting with version 2023.3, model server supports execution of custom Python code. Users can now create their own servables in Python. Those servables can run simple pre or post processing tasks as well as complex ones like image or text generation. 

Reviewer 2: We are not serving Python scripts separately hence they are not servables. They are part of existing servable - mediapipe.
```suggestion
 Starting with version 2023.3, model server supports execution of custom Python code. Users can now create their own servables in Python. Those scripts can run simple pre or post processing tasks as well as complex ones like image or text generation. 
```

Author: Makes sense, but in that case there are more places that require changes. I'll remove references to "servables".

>  Starting with version 2023.3, model server supports execution of custom Python code. Users can now create their own servables in Python. Those servables can run simple pre or post processing tasks as well as complex ones like image or text generation. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 Starting with version 2023.3, OpenVINO Model Server supports execution of custom Python code. This means users can now create their own servables in Python. These servables can execute simple pre- or post-processing as well as complex tasks like image or text generation. 
```

 
 Python execution is enabled via [Mediapipe](../mediapipe.md) by built-in `PythonExecutorCalculator` that allows creating graph nodes that execute Python code. That way Python servables can be used as standalone endpoints (single node graphs) or be part of larger Mediapipe solutions.

>  Checkout [quickstart guide](quickstart.md) for simple usage example.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 Check out the [quickstart guide](quickstart.md) for a simple example that shows how to use this feature.
```

 ## Building Docker Image

> Publically distributed Docker images support Python, but they do not come with any external modules. If bare Python is all you need then you can use public image directly. Otherwise you need to extend public image with additional layers that will install all the stuff you need for your Python code to work. For example, let's say you need numpy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Publicly distributed Docker images support Python, but they do not come with any external modules. If bare Python is all you need then you can use public image directly. Otherwise you need to extend public image with additional layers that will install all the modules you need for your Python code to work. For example, let's say you need numpy.
```

> Publically distributed Docker images support Python, but they do not come with any external modules. If bare Python is all you need then you can use public image directly. Otherwise you need to extend public image with additional layers that will install all the stuff you need for your Python code to work. For example, let's say you need numpy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The publicly available `openvino/model_server` image on Docker Hub supports Python, but does not come with external modules installed. If Python is all you need then you can use the public image without modification. Otherwise, you will need to extend the public image with additional layers that install any modules required for your Python code to run. For example, let's say your code requires numpy.
```

> In that case your Dockerfile may look like:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In that case, your Dockerfile may look like this:
```

```dockerfile
FROM openvino/model_server:latest
USER root
ENV LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/ovms/lib
ENV PYTHONPATH=/ovms/lib/python
RUN apt update && apt install -y python3-pip git
RUN pip3 install numpy
ENTRYPOINT [ `/ovms/bin/ovms` ]
```

TODO: Here we could provide make target with requirements location as a parameter.

### Building Model Server From Source
In above section you use public Docker image. In case you want to build it from source do the following:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/model_server.git
cd model_server

> make docker_build MEDIAPIPE_DISABLE=0 PYTHON_DISABLE=0 OV_USE_BINARY=1 RUN_TESTS=0

Reviewer 2: It doesn't make sense to me to set varaibles to their default values. It is only distraction.

cd ..
```
Resulting Docker image can be extended with additional layers just as the public one.

## Python Servable

When deploying Python servable, Model Server expects Python file with an `OvmsPythonModel` class implemented:

```python
class OvmsPythonModel:

    def initialize(self, kwargs):
        """
        `initialize` is called when model server loads graph definition. 
        It allows to initialize and maintain state between subsequent execute() calls and even graph instances. 
        For gRPC unary, graphs are recreated per request. 
        For gRPC streaming, there can be multiple graph instances existing at the same time. 
        OvmsPythonModel object is initialized with this method and then shared between all graph instances. 

>         Implementing this function is required (should it be?).

Author: Nope, I'll remove this. Initialize will be optional.

            * output_streams: list of strings
                List of output stream names defined for the node in graph configuration
        -----------
        """
        print("Running initialize...")

    def execute(self, inputs):
        """
        `execute` is called in `Process` method of PythonExecutorCalculator which in turn is called by Mediapipe framework. 
        How Mediapipe calls `Process` method for the node depends on the configuration and the two configurations supported by PythonExecutorCalculator are:
        
        * Regular: `execute` runs every time the node receives inputs. Produces one set of outputs per one set of inputs. For unary endpoints it's the only possible configuration.
        * Generative: `execute` runs multiple times for single inputs set. Produces multiple sets of outputs over time per single set of inputs. Works only with streaming endpoints. 

        Implemeting this function is required.

        Parameters:
        -----------
        * inputs: list of pyovms.Tensor
        -----------
        
        Returns: list of pyovms.Tensor or generator
        """
        ...
        return outputs

    def finalize(self):
        """

>         `finalize` is called when model server unloads graph definition. It allows to perform any cleanup actions before the graph is removed. Implementing this function is optional.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        `finalize` is called when model server unloads graph definition. It allows to perform any cleanup actions before the graph definition is removed. Implementing this function is optional.
```

For gRPC unary, graphs are recreated per request.

For gRPC streaming, there can be multiple graph instances existing at the same time.

`OvmsPythonModel` object is initialized with this method and then shared between all graph instances.

#### Parameters and return value

`initialize` is called with `kwargs` parameter which is a dictionary. All keys are strings. Available keys and values:

| Key           | Value type | Description |
| ------------- |:-----------| :-----------| 
| node_name     | string | Name of the node in the graph |
| input_names   | list of strings | List of input stream names defined for the node in graph configuration | 
| outputs_names | list of strings | List of output stream names defined for the node in graph configuration |

`initialize` is not expected to return any value.

#### Error handling

Signaling that something went wrong should be done by throwing an exception.
When model server catches exception from `initialize` it cleans up all Python resources in the graph (including those belonging to the correctly loaded nodes) and sets the whole graph in invalid state.

> **Implementing this function is required (should it be?).**

Author: Will remove it. Initialize will be optional.

### execute

`execute` is called in `Process` method of `PythonExecutorCalculator` which in turn is called by Mediapipe framework. How Mediapipe calls `Process` for the node depends on the configuration and the two configurations supported by `PythonExecutorCalculator` are:

#### Regular 

`execute` runs every time the node receives complete set inputs with the same timestamp. It produces one set of outputs per one set of inputs. For unary endpoints it's the only possible configuration. On the implementation side, to use that mode, `execute` should `return` outputs.

```python
def execute(self, inputs):
    ...
    return outputs
```

More information along with the configuration aspect described can be found in [execution modes](#execution-modes) section.

#### Generative 

> `execute` runs multiple times for single set of inputs with the same timestamp. It produces multiple sets of outputs over time per single set of inputs. Works only with streaming endpoints. On the implementation side, to use that mode, `execute` should `yield` outputs.

Reviewer 2: I think we may need to establish some terminology here.

- graph and nodes options

### PythonExecutorCalculator

Main part of the configuration is the node setting. Python nodes should use `PythonExecutorCalculator` and **must** be named. See a basic example:

```pbtxt
node {
  name: "python_node"
  calculator: "PythonExecutorCalculator"
  input_side_packet: "PYTHON_NODE_RESOURCES:py"
  input_stream: "INPUT:input"
  output_stream: "OUTPUT:output"
  node_options: {
    [type.googleapis.com / mediapipe.PythonExecutorCalculatorOptions]: {
      handler_path: "/ovms/workspace/model.py"
    }
  }
}
```

Let's break it down:

- `name`: the name by which the node will be identified in the model server. Every Python node in a graph must have a unique name.

- `calculator`: indicates the calculator to be used in the node. Must be `PythonExecutorCalculator`.

- `input_side_packet`: a shared data passed from the model server to the Python nodes. It allows to share `OvmsPythonModel` state between multiple graph instances. Must be `PYTHON_NODE_RESOURCES:py`.

- `input_stream`: defines input in form `[TAG]:[NAME]`. Mediapipe allows configurations with indexes i.e. `[TAG]:[INDEX]:[NAME]`, but `PythonExecutorCalculator` ignores it.

> - `output_stream`: defines output in form `[TAG]:[NAME]`. Mediapipe allows configurations with indexes i.e. `[TAG]:[INDEX]:[NAME]`, but `PythonExecutorCalculator` ignores it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `output_stream`: defines output in form `[TAG]:[NAME]`. MediaPipe allows configurations with indexes i.e. `[TAG]:[INDEX]:[NAME]`, but `PythonExecutorCalculator` ignores it.
```

        # Read inputs 
        image_input = inputs[0]
        print(image_input.shape) # (<image_binary_size>, )
        print(image_input.datatype) # "BYTES"

        text_input = inputs[1]
        print(text_input.shape) # (<string_binary_size>, )
        print(text_input.datatype) # "BYTES"

        numpy_input = inputs[2]
        print(text_input.shape) # (2, 3)
        print(text_input.datatype) # "FP32"
        
        # Convert pyovms.Tensor objects to more useful formats

        # Pillow Image created from image bytes
        image = Image.open(io.BytesIO(bytes(image_data)))
        # Python string "some text"
        text = bytes(text_input).decode()
        # Numpy array with shape (2, 3) and dtype float32
        ndarray = np.array(numpy_input)
        ...

```
### Timestamping

Mediapipe graph works with packets and every packet has its timestamp. The timestamps of packets on all streams (both input and output) must be ascending.

When requesting inference, user can decide to use automatic timestamping, or send timestamps themself along with the request as `OVMS_MP_TIMESTAMP` parameter. Learn more about [timestamping](../streaming_endpoints.md#timestamping)

> When it comes to Python nods, `PythonExecutorCalculator`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When it comes to Python node `PythonExecutorCalculator`:
```
